this video is going to cover a few
different topics it is in part a direct
reply to a question from a patreon
supporter about u.s. foreign policy
textbook political science these kinds
of classical questions and it's in part
a little bit more of a broad
philosophical discussion of a subtle
theme that has run through my channel
since day one the question of making I
want statements in politics and your
personal life in human psychology
statements
I want blank some think we're culturally
discouraged from doing and that consider
must be crucially important and then
that latter topic links to a whole bunch
of other I think salient and meaningful
questions in our lives including even
the neverending controversy of
needleless versus ante natal list versus
anti anti Naida list I can't I can't
identify as a pro natal esteem an anti
ng list so we begin my best girl melissa
is sitting here off-camera some of you
guys will know I'm having her hang in on
the video as I like to say so she's not
under pressure to keep up constant witty
banter but she can she can come at any
time and it gives me somewhere to talk
to rather than rather than staring too
intensely into the camera
what's the wild there's a video don't
even knows this that I want to do
whatever I really got expressed rage or
something at the camera where I don't
have her participating that way but I
like it gives a little bit more of a
conversational tone even if she doesn't
say a word in my experience all right so
my longtime supporter Muhammad Socrates
wrote in we are apparently going to meet
Muhammad when we are in Europe when
we're in Brussels not Paris I believe so
we're making that happen
he writes quote thanks to the
interesting video which is raised for me
a lot of interesting questions about
your actual views concerning political
theory do you think that spreading
democracy is a good thing as such I'd
emphasize what makes this difficult
question is exactly thrilling as such
and that democracy in itself is a virtue
regardless of the circumstances of its
appearance Oh
so if you're if you're a little bit of a
cosmopolitan well-educated person that's
that's a tough question answer and
exactly well we'll get back to why that
is do you think the nations should care
about this is question two I guess do
you think the nation should care about
and intervene in other nations affairs
so that's really the segue to this
broader more subtle philosophical thing
I want to talk about here and do you
think there is some kind of moral
justification or imperative for
interventionism as it pertains to the
United States in this century so
far--and cetera you know yeah see um
actually I think question three I can
roll into uh roll into question one um
all right do you think that spreading
democracy is a good thing as such so
guys you know just lately we've been
reading the reading the classics again
I'm doing Aristotle I've been doing
Xenophon Socrates played a hole all
kinds of all kinds of ancient Greek
ancient Athenians stuff um in the real
world we have terrifying and fascinating
examples like what happens when
democracy arrives in Iran now maybe to
use one of my viewers will be more
familiar with September 11th 2001
happens the United States starts its
endless war to reshape the map of
Central Asia what if in the year 2002
the United States Army sweeps over
Afghanistan and then you create an
Afghan democracy well if you did that
near 2002 they might well elect the
Taliban they might well like the people
you just kicked out of power
um certainly the vast majority of people
in that country if it's a democratic
country at that time 2002 were totally
opposed to women's education and when I
say that I don't just mean they were
opposed to women getting PhDs or
whatever coming medical doctors they
were opposed to women getting basic
literacy and you know great creative
education so you guys may not know this
there's a whole crazy history now and
billions of dollars spent of
international agencies sometimes United
Nations sometimes European Union or
other donor nations trying to educate
traditional rural Muslims in Afghanistan
to get them to accept the basic concept
of female education not not even female
equality but that girls can go to high
school and this it's been a it's been a
huge battle so if you have democracy in
a country where the vast majority of
people are religious fundamentalists who
are you know of who are in favor of
cutting the foreskin off of every male
penis who may be in favor of female
genital mutilation so I consider male
circumcision general mutilation I
consider female circumcision female
genital mutilation then the question is
what good is democracy in the hands of
this this public this disability now sir
the reaiiy wasn't just lifting this book
for the the exercise that gives to my
arm guys you know I put up a graphic on
Twitter recently showing just the nut
the succession of years as you make the
transition from Herodotus
to through cities from Thucydides to
Socrates and then Socrates to Plato
played a pterosaur it's it is all
crowded together historically all those
lives overlap in dynamic ways um but
really Aristotle is kind of half a
generation after Plato Plato is half a
generation after Socrates you get this
you get this fine you know the the
passage of time really matters in
understanding politically what's going
on one of the dig pardon me one of the
big differences between Plato and
Socrates is the overweening emphasis on
public education so if you think about
what what is the point of the discourse
on democracy well for Socrates officer
also all three of these people noted
name are basically pretty lukewarm
they're critics of democracy Socrates is
a critic of democracy played at was a
critic of democracy Aristotle's critical
democracy in different ways and we could
digress for hours on us however if you
even look at the structure of the
organization of Aristotle's politics
politics Paris though is really a thesis
on the necessity of public education and
I see in Plato Plato's just prior to
Aristotle he comes out of the crisis of
seeing the execution of Socrates with
this conclusion that yeah the
the ultimate priority we have to have
for the future of the future of Greece
is public education now the the
political context for this is at that
time
Athens did not have any system for
education whatsoever and Athens had just
won that pardon me
Athens had just lost the war against
Sparta Sparta the country that won the
war was the one country that really did
have a system of government mandated
state controlled centralized public
education
now that system public education was
horrifying it was kind of a cartoonish
super villainy made into public
education it's it's unbelievable but
they could see certainly people like
Plato sat back in amazement and looked
at the military if not cultural and
organizational spirity of sparta sparta
who didn't have a lot of other
advantages and they saw wow this is what
having universal public education will
do and they saw so public education is
creating equality in a sense that
democracy in Athens was all about
equality equality still a huge theme an
era so what is equality really mean well
equality is also linked to to this issue
of public education so in the era of
Socrates his whole discourse is about
virtue virtue and voluntary poverty and
manliness and that carries on with the
the cynics and the Stoics and other
schools of law secure that on but you
get in the amongst the academics Plato's
Academy and then the Lyceum of Aristotle
is it's a very different political
discourse that is where ultimately the
point of politics or the plea of
politics is to make a shift to a system
public education and that is exactly the
crisis you age so you asked me this
question
totally great question is is democracy a
good thing as such is democracy a virtue
regardless of the circumstances of
experience okay so let's say the year is
2002 really the question is almost the
same now in 2018 if the year is 2002 and
we are suddenly the conquistadors of
Afghanistan we find ourselves we've just
conquered Afghanistan sorry in reality
how many years to take seven states to
conquer any significant portion of
Afghanistan this was took a long time
sorry I remember I remember just a few
years ago a detailed military report
from the US dealing with highway by
highway how little control they had of
the country it was like ten years into
the conflict and you know major highways
and you know farmers can't sell their
produce in Swan because they you guys
don't control the highways so it was a
long hard war that I think some might
say ended with with mixed results or a
steal but let's say hypothetically
America rolls tanks and and in the year
2002 they conquer Afghanistan instantly
what what really are the options for
democracy this this is so I mean this is
why I say I'm gonna answer question
three part and parcel of question one
the pursuit of democracy in these
conditions of inequality of education
has almost always led to the creation of
an elite and a left where could say a
vanguard who then rule in the name of
democracy through completely non
democratic means so now in the reality
of Afghanistan who are the people you're
going to select and cultivate and make
into this ruling elite they're going to
be the most westernized people so
there's a technical term for this in
political science it's called a comprar
door elite so I mean if you are Spanish
colonists in South America or something
and you promise you're gonna give people
native self-government who are the
natives you're gonna choose together and
they're not gonna be the examples of
native religion aid there's gonna be the
most westernized the most intermixed
with Western Europe those who have
received or appropriated the most of
Spanish culture Western culture over you
you want to put it so likewise you have
a situation where you're creating an
elite in the capital city of people who
are willing to work with the Americans
probably people who can speak or read a
little bit of English memory they can
speaker read something but possibly also
people who maybe went away and got a
technical education and something like
engineering or medicine they might not
have got in the West maybe they went and
got an education in Saudi Arabia and
came back they went somewhere and
and now you have an elite in the capital
then you entered so this is really
textbook political science you get into
what are called classical center
periphery conflicts this happened in the
Sudan seven too many Muslim countries
did also many many non-muslim countries
where you have people in the center even
though they claim they may rule in the
name of democratic values they are so
alienated from the people of the
countryside or maybe even maybe even
poor people in the capital city the poor
people in the countryside perhaps still
support the Taliban or other Muslim
fundamentalist groups like the Taliban
they represent a set of values what have
you that are utterly incompatible these
people they look at the ruling elite
they say who are these people
I mean look at even just look at
photographs of what the ruling elite was
like in Iran before they had their their
revolution there were European suits you
know there were dressed up like Western
Europeans there and they many of them
have gone away to study in Western
Europe and come back you know I remember
in the lecture from an Iranian guy was
you know you could tell politically
where some was about what kind of what
kind of cup they drank coffee out of you
know they drank coffee like Europeans
they were westernized in European eyes
and of course involved in the oil
industry and where that money comes from
so you you have normally you get
worsening and worsening center periphery
relations and sorry as I've said just in
alluding to the Spanish as a parallel
something you get a situation in which
what is called democracy and name is in
fact heated and resented as Western
colonialism whether or not it wants that
wants to wear that name so you know
there were again I've seen scholars you
know agonizing over this at some points
there was to some extent a sincere
attempt to create democracy in places
like Vietnam Laos and Cambodia I'd
really have to get into details well how
do you do that if the Communists are
really a very popular choice if you have
votes and people want to vote for
communists now you know obviously if you
really believe in democracy you should
let let them elect communists you know
that's their culture of those are their
values that the Communist Party stands
for election and they get elected you
know let them
that was not the attitude of the CIA
that was not the attitude of a series of
American presidents you know including
Dwight Eisenhower a lot more blame has
to be placed on Eisenhower's head for
everything that went wrong in the 20th
century but including Vietnam War and
what-have-you
we had some legitimate elections in Laos
in which the Communists were a minority
party they didn't win outright but they
want some seats in parliament in a
certain role government certain level of
representation in in their parliamentary
systems that it and the CIA in the
States they couldn't stand for it and
they freaked out and they tried to shut
down Parliament and have fake elections
instead yeah they really destroyed the
democratic process so you know democracy
and this isn't even this isn't even
talking deeply but this died with the
shallowest form this is talking about an
imitation a second-rate knockoff
imitation of the British parliamentary
tradition we're not talking about
Athenian democracy direct democracy or
what have you um he asked you know is
democracy in itself a virtue
well democracy has some virtues when
democracy when you true democracy not
necessarily just shallow democracy no
parliamentary democracy not this kind of
compra de lete ruling in the name of the
democracy but it's actually colonialism
real democracy means that people learn
from their own mistakes right power
remains in the hands of the public and
they're gonna make bad decisions and
then regret them and then make different
decisions the next time five years later
or what have you so I mean you know if
you really believe in democracy the
question is do you believe that
Afghanistan could within 50 years if
they had meaningful democracy do you
think they could progress their way out
of you know religious fundamentalism
that's a that's a really meaningful
question if a place like Vietnam or Laos
had meaningful democracy say right after
the end of World War two when the French
Empire is falling apart
even if communism was a popular it was
maybe one of several popular you know
political ideologies do you think they
could have had that debate and maybe
experimentally tried some of those
methods of farming and realized Society
and gotten disillusioned and moved I say
hey people are starving to death because
this economic system isn't working let's
let's let's try
you know I mean I think that really is
the question is you know is democracy
and self virtue of assertiveness those
parents and the the counter-argument is
what you already see I mean this is not
the this is not the only issue dealt
with in Aristotle's politics by the way
but it's it's a big one in Aristotle in
broad brushstrokes how can you have
democracy how can you have no more
brother how can you have polity how can
you have a real political community how
can you have a working political system
without quite a high level of education
right mmm you know so look I mean and I
you know is there a level so low like
you know maybe Afghanistan and in 2002
in terms of illiteracy and religious
religious fanaticism what have you that
that democracy can't work so you can you
know you can you can draw a dotted line
there I mean democracy in theory is an
anti elitist ideologies but I think it
deserves to be criticized to say it
actually has a form of implicit elitism
well you by the way Aristotle tries to
recognize and make explicit that's why
he Healy coins the term I looked into
but he wasn't the first person used the
term he changed that if he basically
gave a totally new meaning to the term
timocracy he has democracy and timocracy
uses with a totally different meaning
than anyone else who who used it before
and this is actually recognizing the
economic inequality and and and I would
say it's not really in that section I
would say also this issue of educational
inequality and how that how that relates
to democracy okay say you can jump
anytime babe but you you don't seem to
be you don't seem to be yeah I'm happy
to have you here it's cool much all
right so uh question number two that's
where I get this issue of what we want
and desire and why it's important to say
this I think in political and personal
discourse do you think that nations
should care about and intervene in the
affairs of other nations okay so I'm
gonna start by answering this with a
with a want statement a statement what I
want um okay look
even even better even more fundamental
why is it so important to make
statements of I want blank one of my
first videos to do this in a big way
it's as I say it's kind of a subtle
issue with in many of my videos about
politics was my video title on community
V that's been translated in many
languages and I remember just thinking
look what is the most honest cutting
deep way for me to you know address this
it's like okay no I've just I've got a
set-aside to make and I want statement
um well you know statements if I want
they state your objectives blah blah
blah there's a certain kind of utility
to them but above all else statements of
I want
let us evade and discard what I would
call the the the the discourse of false
necessity so a lot a lot of political
discourse a lot of ethical discourse a
lot of identity politics is framed in
terms of necessity right see many vegans
will try to construct an argument this
way x y&z are necessary or you can be a
feminist who tries to argue well x y&z
are nesting and you know what what what
does necess what does necessary really
mean in this in this sesame you know if
we try to make the argument that
recycling is necessary and of course I
know what you mean but sorry so I mean
veganism is maybe the easiest and
simplest example you you try to construe
an argument that society can't exist at
all that it can't survive if it doesn't
become vegan or something you know where
you're trying to create a notion of
necessity that obviously is false
no of course mean society has always
existed by exploiting animals what's
currently the vast majority people are
but you know I understand they're trying
to kind of make an indirect moral
argument by appealing to an idea of
necessity but I think this is ultimately
a kind of intellectually insincere way
to proceed with an argument you know
sorry so patriarchy if a feminist is
talking about the necessity of
abolishing the patriarchy and the
counter-argument I don't know look at
the dark ages look at the extreme gender
inequality we had for centuries and
centuries it's not necessary now the
question is you know I think it's more
honest
and direct and useful what is it you
want what is the society you want to
create and why is that and what are
gonna be the advantages of disadvantages
that I think is just a more useful way
to approach it rather than to talk about
what mean the ultimate the ultimate you
know phony dishonest form of necessity
were the Communists who tried to
construe that there was gonna be this
revolution that would tear society apart
that this was something they knew you
know they could see the future the world
that was necessary and then all these
other crazy interpretations creep in due
to that that myth of false necessity so
creating an ideological abstraction to
create a sense of false necessity I
think is a dishonest way to see what
this kind of argument and I'm saying
it's it's more honest if we talk about
you know what we want so you know this
question should foreign nations care
about and intervene in one of those
affairs it would be so easy to say oh
well this is necessary due to human
rights this is necessary due to the
United Nations Charter you know we can
we can spin out all kinds of phony false
shallow claims about necessity what what
is it we want or was that I want um
the in one word what it is I'm hoping
for here is scrutiny right
I mean scrutiny I mean this this came up
for me even in the recent video talking
about the nature of peer review I write
something I come up with an idea if I
only have yes-man or only my own
employees looking at it at what point
does it get scrutiny one of the real
questions is you know if I come up with
a business plan when I present it to the
bank is the bank really gonna evaluate
you know is this a viable plan for a
business do these go at what point is
scrutiny brought to bear on something
whether it's academic political economic
or what-have-you
I mean recently I told this story at
length I don't know if you heard it in
the podcast about the the rubber
industry in Laos yeah it's the rubber
tree and a guy like me is standing there
like well look I've scrutinized these
reports I've noticed there are some
contradictions you know in in the
financial projections and so on well who
else who else is going to do that job I
mean there I am I'm a I was a
all of Buddhism I wasn't is not remotely
my job but I was capable of bringing
scrutiny to bear on that when nobody
inside the bubble was doing so either
because they couldn't they were not
incentivized to write so you know
scrutiny is something tremendously
valuable and scrutiny can avert terrible
problems it can also redress terrible
problems with it once they've started
and there is this kind of advantage that
detachment brings with scrutiny where
you know France can look at what Canada
is doing and Canada can look at what
France's doing and we can learn from one
another's mistakes we can point out one
of those mistakes so it may seem as if
and many people say this
self-righteously no no no scrutiny must
be domestic within a democratic system
well look I would I would love to think
about human nature and about democracy
that there's so much scrutiny within a
given society within a given culture
that you don't need scrutiny across
cultural lines across national lines
during World War two the United States
was producing all this propaganda about
human equality propaganda against racism
when their enemy was Nancy Germany or in
an even more subtle way that was harder
for Americans to deal with they were
also doing propaganda against Japanese
racism because the Japanese are racist
against the Chinese a Mongolian it's
harder for Americans to relate to right
so stuff about racial equality and the
brotherhood of man the US Army itself
internally with me at the racism against
black people unbelievable I heard a very
moving autobiography as a radio
documentary a black man the United
States and during World War two she was
African American man and the oh he
managed to get into the submarine
service he was in the Navy and they move
he might have moved on submarines after
I forget if he was in submarines during
World War two but it was in the Navy and
submarines and you he had to work really
hard to get that to get that posting and
the only job they let him do this is
during the the segregation of the Army
was polish boots
he was a bootblack he was polishing
boots
all these stories with the unbelievable
race
of white officers against him as a black
man in the army and he knew because he
saw it the white man in the army treated
German war criminals better than they
treated him they treated the German POWs
German prisoners of war people they cut
better than he was treated as a black
man in the army and he had specific
anecdotes showing this he literally
wasn't allowed to eat at the same table
as the white soldiers and the German
POWs were the German POWs that so the
German prisoners of war were eating
better food than he was eating as a
black man America so I'll come out of
the stories just briefly this shows I
mean scrutiny and detachment I wish it
wasn't true I wish you could say well
the the the hypocrisy here was obvious
to everybody
obviously Americans just saw Wow Nazi
Germany is the enemy racism as the enemy
fascism is the enemy and here within
America we have this graces amande
fascism so therefore before put all the
pieces of the puzzle are laid out on the
table for you therefore segregation is
wrong
therefore how is it you know this this
this lie about separate and equal I mean
you know gee why do black people not go
to the same schools as white people do
black people really have a separate but
equal Harvard or something you know
these questions should have been
incredibly obvious to everyone but it's
not obvious it's not obvious because
you're not detached the people involved
are a part of the culture they're
internal to the culture there's an etic
versus emic thing going on here because
you're within the culture you deeply buy
into these cultural values you don't
question it at the same time that you're
participating in this war and and and
spouting this this propaganda zone so
for this this particular black man
himself I'm sorry I do not know the guy
its name maybe someone's gonna email me
this guy's name because I think he
published a book and he you know he did
I forget it was but he did he did tours
and lectures you know talking about his
story and you know he made he made a
statement about this there was a museum
exhibit about his life and some things
of this but you know for him the moment
when he questioned the culture he was a
member of was that his boat or submarine
I forget which was shipwrecked and he
washed up on the eastern shore of Canada
so somewhere like Nova Scotia New
Brunswick one of those places and he had
grown up in segregation America and he
was terrified so he also when he when he
washed up you know he had hypothermia
she actually appeared to him when he
could see and hear people around him but
he actually couldn't speak and couldn't
really move his limbs he was in this
rubbery state where core temperature has
dropped so low that you're not wearing
probably and you know white people
cluding white women they stripped him
naked you had that they had to scrub off
oil he had you know there was oil spill
you know from the boat and someone they
they had to clean him and then you know
put I think they had to put him in hot
water and then wrap him up that you know
they went through this thing and these
people these are you know these were
probably know Presbyterians on the east
coast of Canada I don't know they were
but they weren't racist against black
people they had most had never met a
black person and they just they were not
at all like the white Americans he'd
known in the American South or within
the American army and they treated him
like anyone else you know of course at
first you know okay that's funny he'll
in this appointment and they invited him
into his home
sorry into their home you know each
novice each soldier was each of the
people rescued from the shipwreck were
put in different homes and he was in a
home with a white family that had a
white daughter and he said the first
night he was there he didn't sleep at
all he was wide awake all night because
he absolutely assumed that the KKK or a
similar group would come and lynch him
because where he was from for a black
man to be in a house with a young white
woman was just a death sentence he was
absolutely terrified that he was gonna
be killed and in the contrary in the
morning when the family got up they
invited him to sit and eat with them at
the same breakfast table you know they
they just treated him like anyone else
and they had you know meaningless
chitchat with him and no white person
had ever treated in that way before and
it was shocking to him and gave him this
you know parallel in his own mind where
suddenly he was treating he was
comparing the way he was treated in this
town in small-town Canada to the way he
was treated within the United States of
America within the US Army and it
influenced his life in a whole bunch of
ways among other things he actually
applied for and eventually got a
promotion within the Navy to stop just
shining shoes he became a radar
technician
you know he had a long career and went
on to question the races in the society
is that so this is even even for the
people who are defending our oppressed
by it he got a jarring perspective from
the outside of questioning his cultural
assumptions I mean he was shown in the
most visceral way possible you could
live with white people as equals he had
that he spread in all of us for two
weeks or something he wasn't there for
that long but you know this is during
the war so they weren't rescued right
away they didn't the army didn't have
the resources to go pick up shipwreck
victims straight away something he did
live in that community for some some
length of time and got to know those
people and it was possible for black and
white people I mean there was no reason
to hysterically fear that everyone was a
rapist during this crap this is possible
it's also possible form to be a radar
technician well you know he started to
question the dogma he was raised with he
was raised with the dogma that black
people were you know intellectually not
capable that that kind of work you know
and that kind of thing that he was
doomed to just polish shoes and so on so
look there is something in practice to
the outside perspective you know for
people within Saudi Arabia they think
they can participate in the Olympic
Games and not have any female athletes
have a male-only it's like team and the
outside country saying them know this is
actually unacceptable and then they
think well we can have female athletes
but they're not going to wear bathing
suits no it's not acceptable you can't
swim in a burqa and the Olympic Games
you know so this is a coach no this is
the shallowest type of cultural
challenge but still you you get my point
through this kind of international
mutual scrutiny there's a there's a
tremendous impetus towards progress to
recognizing or noticing flaws in your
own society and system and you know I
think what gets worked out as a set of
minimum standards now again within
Canada within my generation the terrible
situation of our First Nations our
native people or indigenous people what
I'm going to say you know the vast
majority were just blind to it they just
didn't want to know didn't want to hear
about it they didn't want to think about
it we would have benefited enormously if
some other country were scrutinizing
we're saying hey you don't you don't
live up to this minimum standard I know
with Turkey
you know those questions were asked us
Turkey was applying for membership in
the European Union and the European
Union would then point out on a probable
look at how you you treat your own
ethnic minorities the Kurdish minority
being the most obvious and at that time
it was literally illegal to buy or sell
like an audio CD with a song and Kurdish
you know their their music and their
language was actively being suppressed
or theoretically driven into extinction
is gonna think well you think you meet
European standards of human rights or
democracy or diet and you don't so some
people say I think sincerely that Oh
Human Rights is a domestic affair or
democracy is the mr. fair no outside
country you should interfere in another
country it's democracy and what I'm
saying here with this lengthy
introduction is no the exact opposite is
true and I think one of the most
fundamental advantages Europe has is
just that it's divided into kind of
medium-sized and small units of
countries that get to scrutinize one
another um a country like Norway is in a
position to learn from the mistakes made
by England and France and Germany and
there may be in a position to admire and
look up to something going on a Denmark
that's correct
or you know they have all these
competing examples of legal and social
systems it's easy to do for Canada you
know it got got this one giant neighbor
next door and I I don't think we we
learned a whole lot sadly I mean anyway
getting getting into Canadian politics
is isn't a thing but you know we're not
in that kind of situation of healthy
mutual scrutiny and in this sense
healthy mutual competition it's not
really competition talking here it is
really just scrutiny so it's hard to
have scrutiny in a democratic society um
you know I mean we're not even really
talking about non democratic societies
we're not gonna talk about scrutiny and
a feudal society it doesn't seem to me
that that relevant to our discourse but
democracies they're they're very good at
ignoring problems I mean it's
we ignored the situation for the Cree in
the Egypt and the Mohawks and so on and
so forth for decades and decades um you
know America during World War Two and
during I would say the whole Eisenhower
period ignored you know the status of
black people even though these were kind
of enormous ghettos was really obvious
there's really embarrassing UNIVAC under
segregation you'd have like the you'd
have dignitaries visiting from India and
they wouldn't be able to go to
restaurants in the downtown core let's
see you couldn't think they were they
counted as black people and you're
racially surveys yeah what are you gonna
do so you have the Ambassador
ambassadors from India or something like
this so India didn't get have its
independence thumpy of some kind of
representatives coming from India or
something coming to visit a university
or something oh sorry well actually you
know you're not allowed to you're not
allowed to drink from this water
fountain you're actually not allowed to
use the bathroom here at the University
you're not allowed that is ridiculous
you know you can't eat at this
restaurant you can't do any of the
things you you might presume you you do
yeah so anyway if for any if for any
foreign dignitary
u.s. baseball league under segregation
you know they had a lot of talented
Hispanic baseball players sometimes
you'd have two brothers full-blooded
brothers one would count as being a
member of the Negro League and one would
be in the white League because it was
based on their complexion how
dark-skinned you were as an Hispanic
person it's you what baseball league it
was totally sure nobody's he's probably
okay I'm good can see nobody there was a
vocal minority of people who saw problem
offense but I mean look in Canada you
try to find the vocal minority of people
in the 1930s who saw the problem with
what we were doing the First Nations
what we were doing to Korea they J away
the Iroquois you know it's it's a it's a
small minority you know it's
unbelievable
how small that that might already is and
then as you move for but even into the
1960s and so on yeah
really really great and yeah we would
have benefited enormous Lee but that
kind of mutual scrutiny if you want to
pop in Bay pop in okay good
that's mortifying
my girlfriend year so yeah
so I said before talking this in
democratic system there are some
examples of non democratic systems we
can we can talk about that really matter
one of them is the university sorry this
is all under the heading of things I
want I want scrutiny so I want it to be
possible you know in within a university
to say hey hey the Chinese language
course is not working right so people
are paying thousands of dollars to learn
Chinese they're sitting in a classroom
with 40 students one professor the
professor presses play on a cd-rom and
they fill out photocopied worksheets
guess what at the end of this process
after four years I speak this much
Chinese you know and believe me I did
detailed research on this believe me
there are quantifiable measures of how
ineffective this is as so the university
system nobody's elected in Canada
nobody's public honorable they're not
accountable to Parliament they're not
accountable to anyone they're not
accountable of the students nothing and
if you say someone to that which I did
it's a real world you know I took the
complaint forward through all of the
democratic and non-democratic means open
to me including and what the Parliament
with it so Parliament's and the
Ombudsman and the president the
University in the head of the department
and so on you know this is a really
glaring case and of course it was in all
of their interest to try to shut me down
and sweep it under the rug and not you
know I was the problem and and
what-have-you so who can exercise
scrutiny in university system right can
the students scrutinize the professors
can one professor scrutinize another
professor in reality this is parallel to
what I'm pointing out about national
international polls in reality scrutiny
tends to only creep into the system when
it's one university competing with
another university right when as
University said my University of Canada
might say oh wow look at how they teach
Chinese in Berlin they have this really
good program and it's winning awards is
better than us and they compare in this
oh wow maybe we got to catch up in
Berlin they have just one teacher with
five students and they do this different
method and their kids actually learn
Chinese or something you know
thoth that's hypothetical but normally
that's that's how it's true
so that's that's tragic I wish it wasn't
true and I think one of the challenges
for real-world parliamentary democracies
that I don't regard as democracy in the
true sense of the term
but in you again uh universities are
actively non democratic but one of the
questions is how can you foster scrutiny
meaningful scrutiny within a non
democratic system how can you do it
within a democracy how can you in an
item criticism within the US military
how can people report corruption within
the US military how can people report
incompetence no I have actually read a
little bit about that you do have some
some methods you have you know
whistleblower policies and what-have-you
it's tough right so because this is
supposed to be a chain of command and
you're going to report your own superior
officer is corrupt is taking bribes is
stealing or is isn't common it's tough
so there is runs against the
authoritarian culture of the military of
the university and what have you um
mentioned really briefly one of the most
influential delusions in political
science comes to the work of Immanuel
Kant Immanuel Kant said oh well we have
all these wars and conflicts that arise
from one country vying with another so
therefore the solution all we need to do
is Immanuel Kant said create a group
like the European Union or like the
United Nations create a group of nations
his reasoning was the same way that an
individual relates to a king you'll then
just have a next level up where the
Kings relate to a king of kings the
nations relate to uh to a super nation
and then that'll that'll solve the
problem right and my view in a sense
here is is the exact opposite the more
you aggregate into one massive political
unit the less potential you've got for a
meaningful scrutiny and obviously strudy
that was also that the principle that
the United States was built on
tragically I mean I think it's failed
but the idea of the separation of powers
that begins in begins in France with the
their own de Montesquieu believed um and
then as transferred to the United States
that was the idea was that by separating
the judiciary from
the Congress by separating things into
separate stages each would scrutinize
the other each would hold the other to
be accountable I would say it has not
worked out all right so what I've done
here in this analysis again
I've orderly rejected talking about this
in terms of necessity there is no
necessity there's nothing in electable
that the people of Afghanistan have to
emerge from medieval superstition into
modernity
there's no ineluctable progress from
feudalism to democracy there's no
necessity to it the people of China can
remain in a state of dictatorship
forever there's no necessity you know to
to which even democracy on the contrary
when you look at the history of the
world
you have brief periods when governments
had real democracy or little bits and
pieces of democracy was it in Rome maybe
27 years of them having just a bit of
democracy under a republic that was in
some ways you know aristocratic and in
some ways taranta coal but well piece of
democracy for a few years there and then
centuries of rule by emperors it's
ridiculous
so you know um I'm mentioning this
because there's a view that was made
even more popular by the success of
Francis Fukuyama Francis Fukuyama
published a book hold the end of history
but the reason why that book was so
popular was that people already wanted
to believe that there's an inevitable
progress to this to the world from
peasant societies to modern Western
democracy that this was an inevitable
and natural progress and that we can we
can look at these things in terms of in
terms of necessity anyway that was it
was popular because that was something
that that people already wanted to
believe and instead and so I think sir
that's a classic example what I said
sorry 30 minutes ago in the video of
creating an ideological illusion and
then arguing in terms of a false
necessity you know relative to that
illusion and I think the way to move
forward in all honesty instead is just
to say this is what I want and what I
want you know what what does it entail
you know
better and worse with what advantages
and disadvantages so sorry it's it's now
getting late I can see was yeah my
girlfriend's falling asleep but I was
gonna say so look look briefly but
briefly briefly briefly I'm sorry uh you
know it's a topic I'm passionate but
that's why it's worth doing the video
about but you know you had people
respond to your video about having a
baby so having a baby raise the issue of
natal ISM a natal ism you had people
respond to that video by saying you're
just speaking in your own self-interest
they use some other words of that like
selfishness or something I don't know if
you remember the term the egoism and
this kind of thing right ok so I want to
live in a democratic society that's what
I want
it's my self-interest oh it's my
selfishness
it's my ego ISM I am NOT gonna lie to
you like this is a force of nature like
gravity or this is a necessity or this
is you know what am i no this is what I
want no is it good or bad we can talk
about that I would like to see a genital
mutilation of babies abolished I would
like to see circumcision abolished male
circumcision female circumcision how are
we going to accomplish that you know
obviously you can talk about public
education you can talk about all kind of
things you could talk about you know you
whether you use human rights discourse
or not however you you want to advance
that but what am I gonna tell you that
this is this is ultimately something I
want this is about desire and whether or
not I can convince people other people
to you know recognize my desire to go
I'm not gonna tell you it's it's
selfless you know I'm not gonna tell you
itself have negating or is
self-sacrificing
you know no we're ultimately you know
we're talking about questions of what we
want and what we don't want talking
about desires and animus and all these
things so this is a deeply phony
attitude that desire is something
outside of real politics that real
politics is always world of just
managing necessities and that human
desires are something something quite
outside that now you know sorry
just to briefly kind of go over the
the other categories but you know I want
to live in a society where
twelve-year-old girls can go to
McDonald's unaccompanied you know I
mentioned this that always struck me you
know living in downtown Toronto and I
know many many people go to Japan for
more dangerous parts the world they
noticed that in Japan you know children
can go places without their you the
three when sure when we move to a
certain part of China
Melissa will Melissa comes from Detroit
Detroit Detroit pretty banged up and you
were amazed the extent to which children
just you know with their friends we're
going places and doing things alone
unaccompanied by the adults so probably
going to buy a buy ice cream or
something you know
yeah yeah now of course anyway I'd
prefer if these thirteen-year-old girls
were buying vegan food at McDonald's but
this is unrelated to my car discard what
whatever whatever it is they're buying
at McDonald's we don't need to know for
this you know
now what when you even just think about
that desire and all the societies that
don't have it you know a lot of
implications come out of that right
there are a lot of requirements you know
if you want to have a society where
twelve-year-old girls can go to you know
McDonald's unmolested or without fear
without parents you know disallowing it
think about what's built in that
situation culturally in terms of crying
in terms of poverty in terms of drug
addiction you know in terms of
infrastructure and I think frankly in
terms of levels of education obviously
you know women's education you know
enroll in the workforce included
actually I mean this one kind of
fragment of what it means to have a
modern Western parliamentary type
society which does I mean it's it's a
big difference between life in Canada
and life in some other parts of the
world there's a lot you know built into
it and you know I mean sir I mean that
that's a very real very tangible example
with a human face now if somebody says
to by contrast they want to destroy the
patriarchy I don't really know what that
means though I don't really know
with what that entails you know but
that's that's something you know and
indeed for Afghanistan today that may be
unattainable for you know many years to
come
how can you get to being in a society
where some of that some of that is
attainable so you know it's been a
subtle but I think for me profound point
that's come up in many other videos of
wanting to switch from a discourse about
necessity to a discourse about desire
and one of the differences is there's a
kind of ineluctably self-critical what's
the word mover there's there's a kind of
there's kind of vulnerability you open
yourself up to when you say this is what
I want you know and as I said even in my
video on on community my vegan manifesto
video I said look I want this and I
don't have it and maybe I can't have it
maybe this isn't gonna happen in my
lifetime but this is this is my goal
that puts you in a vulnerable place and
I think the reason for building up these
towers of abstraction and ideology is
exactly that people don't don't want to
admit that to themselves this is just
about your desires and your desires may
be pathetic or unattainable or what have
you and people today okay health care in
the United States you know I want to
live in a country where access to
medical care is not based on the ability
to pay I can state that inversely I want
to live in a country in which poor
people are never refused surgery due to
their lack of ability to pay
I well okay but you know I'm just I'm
simplifying it I mean I'm just trying to
simplify down to a work I don't want to
live in a country where one person will
die of a heart attack and another person
will live because of their ability to
pay I want to put it this way you know
they have the same condition and one
person gets good treatment and the other
person gets none and what person gets
good treatment the other person gets
worse treatment for heart attacks cancer
you know you know that's what I want you
know I can't sell you this myth of fake
necessity there isn't going to be a
revolution if we fail to provide it
America
for very long time right it can carry on
this way for four centuries more
tragically or what have you
right you know I'm not I'm not gonna
sell you on any of these other notions
of necessity but as you know also coming
back to the other themes of this video
the main way people engage in this
discourse even within the United States
is to say why is it America can't have
that when Portugal has it Scotland has
it Taiwan has there all these other
countries Japan to some extent still
have a working healthcare system that
takes care of the poor different story
in each place one way or another whether
you think Denmark is better than
Scotland maybe it said well this is
attainable for one else so again it
actually still is this issue of mutual
scrutiny across cultures and across
borders with some sense of detachment
because when you live within that bubble
when that's when that's the only thing
you know it's maybe harder to come to
that perspective and and harder to to
come to that judgment okay guys I think
this video has gone on long enough but
ultimately it is a fallacious argument
to say you only want to have a baby
because that's what you want and that's
that's how the antenatal is tried to
refute you right it's it's you know
fallacious argument to say you only want
to have a democratic society because
that's what you want
it's tautological I mean you what have
you proven or disproven you know you're
correct you know this is something I
want and I'm willing to talk about that
with all the vulnerability that entails
you know I'm not gonna take up my
position on the sort of you know ilusory
stand that you know the inevitability of
history is on my side the way to deal
the progress of science is on my side
it's like no I mean you know I identify
as a nihilist I don't believe any of
that you know with all due humility and
all do vulnerability I'm gonna express
to you my vision of what the future
society should be like I'm gonna express
to you what I want I'm gonna look around
say who's with me who can try to make
something positive happen what are the
next steps we can take if you want this
to if you also see cracks in the facade
of maybe the things we take for granted
maybe the evils in our society that
become invisible thus because we we live
within that society whether we can
challenge that through just the
application of scrutiny scrutiny sweet
generous within our culture scrutiny
looking cross the border to some other
society scrutiny by reading science
fiction even I mean some ideas the first
in that way you know thinking about
another society that could be that's the
origin of of the word utopia Thomas
More's utopia was science fiction of a
sort that one way or another we have
they use scrutiny to make those cracks
to bring out those new ideas to express
those desires and find a way forward
Mohammed thank you for your question I
will see you in Brussels